[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everyone
welcome to church history and theology
today's episode has us delving into the
wonderful world of
hagiography now this will not be a a
massive introduction it is actually more
of a case study in why understanding
what hagiography is and its limits and
what it should actually legitimately be
used for in church history studies as
well as what it should never be used for
these types of things are important
because hagiography more than just about
anything else has skewed people's views
of church history in a very unique way
we have some parallels to such things uh
in the in the studies of regular history
but church history is particularly
susceptible to the effects of misusing
hagiography and so it is helpful to us
to work through these things again as we
work through the history of the church
when we run into things like this it'll
be important for us to take stock of it
and to talk about the nature of
hagiography the nature of uh the book
that we are addressing and this type
thing why am I here why are we talking
about this now we're still in the first
century right hagiography was not an
aspect of the first century so why are
we talking about this now well when we
recently went through when I recently
went through and prepared the lessons on
James the brother of the Lord the main
source of the misunderstandings about
him come from hagiographical sources
things that started mid to late 2nd
Century he is not the only one
and as soon as I started studying that
it opened a world of uh of addressing
hagiography in a way that in our first
season through we did not and so in this
second season I'm going to be making a
lot of references to this and we are
going to be dealing with a lot of the
primary sources especially in the 2
Century just to get a really good feel
for this so but today I really wanted to
preclude that I wanted to give us a good
base of understanding hagiography before
we even break into the 2 Century here in
a few months um and and actually deal
with a case study in how drastically
misunderstanding his um hagiography can
affect the history of the church and
even its own perception not only of
itself but of Theology of the New
Testament and even of py and theology so
let's get into it introduction to
hagiography what what are we talking if
you've never heard the term hagiography
you're probably listening to this
episode for a few minutes and going I
you know you got to start back at at at
rule one let's let's start back at the
very beginning what is hagiography well
hagiography simply put is a um a
combining of two words uh hagios and
graphia these two words come together in
the very same way that the word
biography comes together um biography is
a writing graphia of one's life bio and
here when we have
hagiography um you have writing of a
saint hos writing of a holy person so it
is essentially a biography but it is not
written in the way that we would
understand biographies in the modern era
hagiographies were written not to be
historically reliable that was not their
point uh they were written with
Embellishments often
exaggerations um as as a retelling of
some historical figure or sometimes not
even a historical figure and it was
meant to inspire devotion or to teach
moral lessons it is much more symbolic
than it is factual uh it does not make
any apologies for this the real problem
is when we come in and treat them as
factual that's when we start getting
into trouble and that happens all
through the early church uh it happens
all through the Imperial Church it
happens all through the medieval Church
in fact most of these things go
unchallenged for many many centuries and
that is why we end up with stories like
someone named Thea um which I'll
introduce to you here in a minute as our
case study for today
hagiography again had decent goals but
the way it went through those goals I
think any one of us would admit becomes
problematic because while it aims to
inspire things like faith and encourage
devotion uh or even to highlight virtues
or even Miracles uh in figures that had
lived before them it it does so in the
guise of what we would call historical
fiction but what they would call um a a
holy writing a a saintly
retelling um and that that really
becomes problematic because again there
are attestations and certain
parts of hagiography that are almost
always a characteristic in the stories
such as um Supernatural events on the
regular um uh deliverances or or Angels
being involved in things constantly um
you know nature uh kind of almost
bending to the will of the saint um
Divine protection in unusual ways things
like this that are meant to almost
continue the the biblical Narrative of
these things happening in sporadic
events uh such as like the the
Deliverance of uh of Daniel's three
friends in the fiery furnace um those
things were sporadic and rare but
hagiography if for the lives of the
Saints really up the ticket uh these
things should be almost expected in
certain SE circumstances um these things
should be uh almost normative in some of
them um
and a lot of the symbolic nature of
these things is much more important more
than fact is concerned it leads to a lot
of it's It's actually good in a way
because for us to pursue history we're
able to tell what is a historical
retelling and what is a hagiographical
retelling because in hagiography details
like
geography
um
anachronistic um uh dealings these
things like that will be all over over
the place because they're not worried
about or Desiring to put historical
accuracy necessarily uh that's not the
goal and so it doesn't really become one
of the supporting factors and so there's
a number of anachronisms that usually
show up there's a lot of theological
bias you will have an apostle or a named
person in the scriptures um or even a a
prophet from unfold teaching something
that that Prophet or that Apostle never
taught that way and it shows up in the
hagiography because the person writing
the hagiography the person writing this
this saintly
biography wants that virtue to be on the
lips of that Apostle or on on the lips
of that
Prophet which again then shows us that
there is legitimate ways for our study
of history our study of church history
to actually use hagiography and that is
to understand the time period from which
the hagiography was written it can tell
us about some of the beliefs that are in
the air this kind of spirit of the age
that was going on when that
hagiographical account was being written
what things did they wish that Paul
spoke on more you see what I mean and so
in those ways we were able to uh we were
able to actually fulfill it out in in
certain ways uh the best that we can so
they're not worthless in our study of
church history in fact they're actually
quite valuable because there are so many
of them it does teach us how increasing
desires for this or for that practice or
virtue uh are focused on in the history
of the
church but at the core of it all
hagiography is not history it is a form
of Storytelling that is meant to inspire
and to teach sometimes it inspires and
teaches you know things that are
consistent with scripture uh but other
times it is teaching things that are not
consistent with scripture such as the
example that we're going to be working
on today um again valuable for
understanding the development of the
faith uh throughout culture and time but
again these things have to be approached
critically otherwise we are going to
start confusing our wishes throughout
church history with what truly happened
in the past and on church history and
theology I don't really care what I wish
happened in the past nor what you wish
happened s in the past our goal is to
just look at the past the way it is on
its own terms and if for instance Thea
was actually a part of the first century
story then that makes no difference to
me in my view of scripture um but as you
will see there's every single reason to
not think that at all so before I give
away the end of that what is the story
of Thea if you grew up in Protestant
circles like me uh you have no worth
theidea idea who this person is um
that's not because you didn't read your
new testament enough she's not mentioned
um her story supposedly though uh
intersects with the story of the Apostle
Paul on his missionary journey as he
passes through
Iconium um
his preaching in Iconium is talked about
plainly in Acts chapter 14 uh for a few
verses and then uh he is chased out of
town and he
leaves well that story
gets
embellished and not just embellished but
let's just say completely and thoroughly
retold uh the only things that it holds
in common with acts 14 uh in the acts of
Paul and Thea by the way if you want to
go read the acts of Paul and Thea I'm
going to link it in the show notes here
um it's it only takes about 30 minutes
to read uh just go read it and uh I I
thoroughly support you reading it
because it's going to teach you a whole
lot about the era the late 2 Century of
when it was written then it will really
teach you about uh well Thea and so what
happens let me give you like a a quick
synopsis of the whole story Paul goes
into Iconium and he preaches there and
there's a young woman there who is
betrothed to be married uh to a guy
named tamiris and she hears Paul
teaching primarily about Chastity and
virginity and how super important it is
for salvation now unless you think I'm
overselling that I'll we will get into
the issues of what Paul was supposedly
teaching in this book uh a little bit
later on so just track with me here a
conflict arises because Thea uh for
three days and three nights doesn't stop
from you know hearing Paul speak and you
know she doesn't even move she just
listens constantly and she ends up
calling off her relationship with
tamiris uh Theus then accuses Paul of
misleading people leading to Paul's
imprisonment uh th visits him in jail
risking her you know reputation and all
this kind of stuff but what ends up
happening is that Thea is sentenced to
be burned at the stake for her Defiance
of cultural norms and her breaking of
the betrothed
contract
um they light the fire under her the
story the story continues that uh
rainstorm comes in and puts out all the
Flames saving her um
and Paul is is kicked out of the city
and then um Thea and follows Paul to
Antioch they just hop over to Antioch um
where she is assaulted by another uh
local official named Alexander uh she
rejects all of his advances and uh as a
result of of really more as a result of
dishonoring him uh she like knocks off
his crown and all this stuff uh she gets
sentenced to face wild beasts in the
arena um and and so in the arena uh Thea
is miraculously saved in multiple
occasions on one occasion by uh one of
the female lions um comes up and
prostrates herself before Thea almost in
a in a in a prayer uh mode and then
actually defeats one of the male lions
that's trying to come up and uh and kill
her uh so the female lion the male lion
uh die there's there's a pool of water
inside the uh inside Arena that she uh
baptizes herself in um it was filled
with all these seals uh that are uh
carnivorous on some level um and she
declares her faith she baptizes herself
um and survives that second trial and
attempt on her life her public sympathy
grows Thea is freed she continues her
life um in the original story as a
celibate preacher devoted to spreading
Paul's message of celibacy and virginity
the control of oneself and these types
of things um there is a later addition
to her story uh having Thea living in a
CA in a cave near salua uh up in Turkey
for the next 72 years devoting herself
to Solitude and prayer and teaching um
Healing The Sick and inspiring many to
follow Christ during that time um but
that's a later Edition the original
Edition doesn't have that it just says
that uh she dies peacefully after a long
life of faith and Ministry
um and all of
that ends uh with her death or in some
versions of it the later versions of it
it has part of the cave that she lives
in uh opening miraculously between the
Rocks she walks through and it closes
behind her as she uh enters into life
translated that whole story
is meant again to highlight Christian
ideals of Chastity and divine
deliverance and perseverance portraying
her as a symbol of faith and female
piety um and really even even in the
alternate versions of it that come later
on that are added in in the most likely
in the 4th Century um her Solitude you
know Devotion to the unwavering
commitment to God that she had that's
what it was meant to inspire in people
well so the question with that it says
well so what's the issue with
that
well maybe I'm just
a picky person when it comes to history
um but anyone who is familiar with first
and second century history knows uh
immediately upon reading this story uh
the severe number of problems that
arise um when there are stories
throughout history that uh line up the
question isn't can I fit this in to the
biblical narrative like I could fit
anything into the biblical narrative you
know um I I could find a way uh to fit
in you know uh Gandalf into the New
Testament if I really wanted to uh you
could find a way to find something that
he does that matches up with this and
then this is the visit he has when he's
you know you could fit anything in the
question isn't if you can fit something
in nor is it really the question is is
uh does the New Testament explicitly
teach this this is this is usually how
these problems come up and and it causes
problems not only in um in in biblical
interpretation it causes problems in
church history the question isn't can I
make this work with that the real
question is is it
consistent right if I'm coming up and
saying hey you know someone comes up to
me and say say I think the Apostle Paul
uh taught
that Chastity and virginity are main
virtues of
Salvation my question is not can I fit
that in to a couple of references in 1
Corinthians 7 while ignoring Ephesians 5
my real question is not can I fit that
in first of all my first question is if
it's Apostolic where is it in the New
Testament and then my second question is
let's just say it's not in the New
Testament let's say it's a valid oral
tradition let's say that then at the
very
least it needs to be consistent with the
biblical
witness more than that when we're
studying hagiography we need to do the
same thing with history uh it's it's
trying to fill in gaps inspiring piety
in the middle of History telling stories
about places and things and rulers and
so forth we need to know not only do
some of these rulers exist we need to
know does any of this match what we know
about history or geography or Paul's
theology or anything else and so this is
where we really get into what are the
issues well let's start off
this some of the issues that crop up
about this betray the time period in
which the acts of Paul and Thea are
actually written the acts in Paul and
Thea are actually written at the end of
the 2nd Century probably around the year
80 and because of this the distance from
which the author is obviously writing
and Confused um also the development of
other cities beyond what they were in
the early 1 Century in the' 40s uh when
Paul's visit in Acts 14 takes place
places like Iconium uh are not the same
place in the late 2 Century as they were
in the early 1 Century um and so Iconium
gets gets depicted in a manner that is
is not consistent with what we actually
know uh to have been the early first
century role of that city um the idea
that it is a major Center of Roman
Authority that can do
executions uh in the in the late 40s U
Paul was in Iconium about the year 47
and so if that's the
case we would have to believe in
accordance with the story told here that
leaving a tral for religious reasons in
Iconium in the year
47 could in any way lead to being burned
at the
stake that's not
happening that's not happening in
Iconium if that was happening anywhere
it would not be Iconium it would be in a
major Central Metropolis of Rome you
would have uh immediate appealing
outside those types of things Capital
punishments on that level of that nature
were rare and if they did happen it
would happen in a place like Rome it
would not happen in Iconium this would
not be a local provincial issue by the
way the the perception of this hatred
towards Christians and then burning at
the stake and things like that in the 47
uh or in the 40s even in the 50s this is
not happening these types of things are
being conflated uh with things that
happened in the mid and late
60s things that are not possible for for
um for Thea's story as told in the acts
of Paul and Thea this is not happening
Iconium even in the60s being burned at
the stake for being a Christian is
something that happens during the
neronian persecution which is limited to
Rome and its surrounding areas it is not
Empire wide uh even when we get to the
end of the first century we're not
looking at anything that is definitively
so under even uh the the persecution
under demission the first real
persecution that we have breaking out
that is that is dealing with things on
the local to Empire level is really the
tragan persecution of the
earliest 2nd
Century that being
said when we look at the story of Acts
of Paul Anda and we see that Iconium as
a very modest City in the province of
galatia it it was an important urban
center but it was not on the large scale
of public spectacles that are looked at
in the text and describ there uh that
that really does betray a familiarity
with second late 2nd Century geography
and uh and cityscape than it does in the
early 1 Century doesn't really work like
that beyond that it's not even
consistent with the book of Acts there
is no historical or biblical evidence
for Paul being imprisoned in Iconium as
described there even though he faced
opposition there he faced opposition
everywhere again the question isn't you
know can we uh can we we deal with that
that has nothing to do or can we fit
that in there the question is is it even
consistent with the story what was he
facing opposition for in Iconium we are
actually told in Acts chapter 14 I'd
like to read it in Acts chap 14: 1-7 you
tell me if this is over him teaching on
Chastity and breaking up a marriage
contract acts 14
1-7 now at ionium they entered together
into the Jewish synagogue and spoke in
such a way that great number of both
Jews and Greeks believed but the
unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles
and poisoned their mind against the
brothers so that they remained for a
long time speaking boldly for the Lord
Who Bore witness to the word of his
grace granting signs and wonders to be
done by their hands but the people of
the city were divided some sided with
the Jews and some sided with the
apostles when an attempt was made by
both Gentiles and Jews with their rulers
to mistreat them and to Stone them they
learned of it and fled to lisra and
Derby cities in lonia and to the
surrounding country and there they
continued to preach the
gospel that is not the same
story the idea that Paul is there
preaching on all of this kind of stuff
uh with regards to Chastity and
virginity and and its centrality to um
to Salvation and then is imprisoned
there and the story of the and breaking
up marriages and things like this and
then they leave for Antioch by the way
um in the biblical text that is simply
not the case uh they don't go to Antioch
afterwards the issue was not over
marriage or Chastity or virginity or any
such thing the issue was as it was
everywhere in the late 40s the
relationship between Jews and
Gentiles again don't forget the time
period of this this is year 47 this is 2
to 2 and 1/2 years before the Jerusalem
Council where they settled a lot of
these issues and ensured that people
were clear that uh these divisions ought
not to continue but how to ensure um
Ministry use uh and and and Christian
freedom in the light of living side by
side with Jewish Christians and Gentile
Christians another issue comes up with
the judicial proceedings the trial and
the punishments imposed on Thea in
Iconium uh they do not resemble
practices Associated either with that
time period or with that area um those
would be in larger places like Ephesus
um or or in Antioch or in Rome they
would not be occurring in places like
Iconium and and also as I said before
burning at the stake for something like
this is is one of the plainest
nonsensical things in this text nobody
is being sent to the stake burned to
death because they broke a marriage
contract
and nobody in the 40s anywhere outside
of maybe Jerusalem was being persecuted
and certainly not to these levels like
death uh by Roman officials simply
because they are following a rule that
even the Romans could not determine yet
was called
Christianity the Romans spent a long
time trying to figure out the difference
between Jews and Christians it was very
hard for them and so the idea that there
is Clarity on this the mid-40s I'm sorry
every historical flag flies up against
that uh and burning at the stake did not
even happen until the reign of Nero who
at this point had not even been born yet
if I recall my NOP he was a young child
at this point uh trying to get my whole
timeline in my head so the idea that
that is happening is just
nonsensical when Paul and Thea
supposedly leave Iconium they hop on
over to
Antioch Antioch should be you know
according to the text just basically the
next town over U what seems to happen is
that the writer of the uh acts of Paul
andth get mixed up which Antioch uh
because the way he describes it it sure
sounds like the Antioch that you would
read in the New Testament uh the third
largest city in the Roman Empire in the
first century but it seems that he
misses that misses messes that up with
Antioch and pidia a very small City by
comparison that is near ionium uh not
Antioch on the orantes which is the
Antioch of the New Testament um that
would be the capital of Syria a major
Center for early Christianity but
supposedly this kind of geographical
difficulty even in the way that the AXS
of paulena express it as as being nearby
it does not fit the Antioch of these
things and making it more problematic if
it is the other Antioch if it is the one
from the New Testament for instance it
would have taken them weeks to travel
it's nearly 500 miles away um that would
be untenable that anything about that in
Paul's missionary Journeys is
completely missed not only is it not
consistent with Paul's trip to Iconium
where he goes to lisra and Derby
afterwards cities of lonia uh but not
only that he can't just go to Antioch
and it not be mentioned that is a
massive part that would be almost an
entire other missionary journey um and
and again people's familiarity with
geography in the late 2 century is not
as good as I think everyone thinks they
think it is yeah sure let's go with that
being an accurate sentence
um okay an additional problem the whole
issue with uh being thrown to the uh
lions for dishonoring a local ruler
again this type of stuff uh the these
things were not these things were for
the murderers of society not somebody
who um who really drove nuts a a local
guy who was trying to come up and force
himself on her the idea that she would
be thrown to the wild beasts in Antioch
either of PID or Antioch on the Arantes
neither of these things are happening
for this um being thrown to the wild
beasts so let we have to consider that
Antioch of paidia if anything has any
legitimacy here uh that is not happening
there is no infrastructure there to
handle such a thing um there is no such
display there um those types of things
that we get associated with the stories
those are all early and Mid 2 Century
issues of martyrdom not early first
century issues they don't exist they are
not happening and I would defy anyone uh
to try to reconstruct that happen in the
40s somewhere because it's not
um again the author of this story was
unfamiliar with the local realities of
Asia Minor in the first century uh
naturally so he's writing in the late 2
Century um all of this in fact matches
the late 2nd Century Roman perspective
of Christians living in an Empire that
is increasingly hostile towards them
it's projecting that later cultural and
geographical assumptions back onto the
time of Paul those inaccuracies really
highlight uh the fictional and symbolic
nature of this text uh rather than its
historical reliability and that's one of
the things I have to just simply stop
and be so grateful we have things like
the book of Acts when we look at the
book of Acts as as Luke meticulously
wrote this every single part of that
geography is
accurate every reference that we have to
rulers to the kicking out of of the Jews
from Rome things like this we have
historical corroboration they are
consistent with practices of the time
they are consistent with everything
geography history rulers events people
habits Customs religious realities
that's one of the things that sets apart
the scriptures from things like this
that are
historical fictions one of the things
not the only things there's plenty of
others there's also theological
errors in this book again it only takes
you half an hour to read it go read it
you you when I it's one thing for me to
tell you it's not believable it's quite
another for you to just go read it there
there's actually even several of them on
YouTube uh that somebody's just read an
entire uh version of it uh just go
listen to it only takes you half an hour
do it while you're doing the dishes or
something doing the laundry just here
hear it and realize some of the
difficulties of what's being said there
one of them Thea baptizes
herself this is nonsense in fact this is
the thing that we were going to see here
uh that really starts to set up the
Western Church's opinion of this book uh
but we'll I'll hold off on saying that
right there that's a theological problem
you cannot baptize yourself Thea
baptizes herself while she's being uh
tried and thrown to the Lions uh that
not only contradicts all of Christian
teaching that contradicts everything in
the New Testament with regards to
baptism
period end of
story more than that Paul I want to read
this section I wasn't going to read much
of it uh but I do want to read this
section because I want to hear what are
supposedly Paul's words in in Paul's
voice in this book and you tell me if
this is if this is consistent with what
he teaches in the New Testament or any
teaching of the
scriptures um on the subject of
celibacy uh and Chastity uh as a
requirement for salvation now I'm going
to say that and I know right away people
who love this book are going to be up in
arms about that just listen to what is
said
here and Paul again this is an exerpt
from The Acts of Paul Anda and Paul
having gone into the house of anap forus
there was great joy and bending of knees
breaking of bread and the word of God
about self-control and the resurrection
now I'm going to stop there for a second
self-control in the late 2nd Century
when this is being
written self-control has a much bigger
world uh as a part of it than it is in
say the fruits of the spirit in
Galatians 5 self-control here uh is is
being put forward in the entic way uh
which is um control over one's sexual
desires uh so and you'll see why I say
that here in just a second going back to
it Paul is saying blessed are the pure
in heart for they shall see God that's
quoting Jesus and then we expand that
blessed are they who have kept the flesh
chased for they shall become the temple
of God blessed are they that control
themselves for God shall speak with
them blessed are they who have kept
aloof from this world for they shall be
called
upright blessed are they that have wives
as not having them for they shall
receive God for their
portion blessed are they that have the
fear of God for they shall become angels
of God blessed are they that have kept
the baptism for they shall rest beside
the father and the son blessed are the
merciful for they shall obtain Mercy
there's another quote of Jesus and shall
not see the bitter day of judgment
blessed are the bodies of the virgins
for they shall be well pleasing to God
and shall not lose the reward for their
Chastity for the word of the father
shall become to them a work of Salvation
against the day of his son and they
shall have rest forever and
ever now lest you think that that is not
teaching that Chastity is a requirement
for salvation or an expectation of
salvation laying it out in the beatitud
formula makes it absolutely
required the Beatitudes uh and this is
somebody who is writing his dissertation
that includes the Beatitudes as a
central argument in Matthew um the
Beatitudes are not optional things they
are realities for every
Christian and here expressing that the
majority of them Rewritten are all about
Chastity and the controlling of one's
body and virginity and having wives is
not having them uh that the bodies of
virgins are specifically blessed and
they are well pleasing to God there's a
reward for Chastity specifically uh that
becomes salvation against the day of his
son I mean those those references that
is not in any way by the way consistent
with the New Testament with the
Beatitudes of Jesus or the teachings of
Paul or anything else in the New
Testament that is a by the
way mid to late 2 centur Cy
developing heresy that the anchorites
were speaking now they called all sexual
uh effects or feelings or pleasured or
anything like that wrong and sinful and
actually anti-christian um we'll deal
with the anchorites when we get to them
someday but just understand there's
there's influences in the late 2
centuries that are having a role that
are going on here behind these
words
um portraying this
radical
Chastity uh uh and and and even even in
the in the story itself of of a complete
rejection of traditional roles uh for
instance of a woman who's betrodd and
promised to be married is somehow
legitimately or even
required um if one wants to really be
saved uh leaving that betr the promise
or refusing to get married these types
of things are already warned about and
warned against in Paul's letter to
Timothy saying that there are those
already creeping in with false teachings
who are forbidding marriage uh this type
of stuff just shows when false teachers
get out there and put words in the
Apostle Paul's mouth it doesn't make it
reliable or true in fact more suspicion
and red flag should go up when you see
that again all throughout this one last
thing here is the the overemphasis in
hagiographies like this on Miracles uh
frequent and extreme Miracles that
really Verge on the Fantastical things
that there are unusual things for
instance in the book of Acts that are
being done in Ephesus for instance but
there's reasons for that there's a
reason why a handkerchief that brushed
against the Apostle Paul carried off and
healed sick people in Ephesus okay even
the New Testament text itself says that
those were not ordinary but those were
extra ordinary things that the spirit of
God was doing in Ephesus why well go
back and listen to our entire uh uh
lesson our entire episode on the city of
Ephesus and what was going on there and
why that was happening in Ephesus
because there was extraordinary magic
going on in Ephesus at the time and the
Holy Spirit was doing battle there
unlike anywhere else but making Miracles
the norm and bizarre Miracles at this
that are not paralleled to anything else
in the New Testament but when somebody
is set to the fire then there's a
special rainstorm just for them or you
have a female lion that is uh lying
prostrate before them in a in a
prayerful stance that goes and defends
them from the other lions or or or um
you know carnivorous seals of some sort
that are in a vat of water that she's
allowed to baptize herself in none the
seals you know kill her or anything like
this this these types of things really
just place a a massive overemphasis on
the miraculous that only gets expanded
in later
Traditions well we're going to talk
about the opinion of the church going
forward because this is this shows you
the two different ways that stuff like
this is handled and as we go forward I
am going to be very mindful to speak not
only of the western but also of the
Eastern Church uh with regards to all
sorts of things like this even histories
um and so even from this I'm going to uh
Express from the earliest days there is
a division between the response of the
church in the west or the Christians in
the west versus those in the East this
story gains dramatic popularity in the
East and we're going to hold that off
for a second and talk about the Western
Church's
opinion you may look at that and go what
you're talking about the second Century
uh you know what kind of division is
there already I mean the the the great
schism doesn't happen till 1054 right
correct but the eastern and the Western
sides of the Roman Empire have been
divided and are divided and continue to
be divided all throughout its history
with the exception of the third century
when Constantine brings them together
the third Century sees almost a constant
state of Civil War and uproar and
difficulties between the two sides
there's not hard and fast um you know
boundaries between them until you get
into the uh the fifth century when the
Western Roman Empire Falls but even here
you have difficulties of of of language
and of culture and tradition the Roman
Empire is just too big to hold
together as one singular
thing unless you find a way uh to to
hold its um consistency together using
uh Christian theology in the 4th Century
but that's a story for another time and
a Emperor who took advantage of that
situation anyway that's a whole another
story so let's start in the opinion of
the western church what what does it do
with the acts of Thea and and Paul well
let me give you a quick runr of history
and its realities towards it uh the
first response to it comes from Teran um
late 2nd Century he writes about this um
now this is usually everyone's first
boilerplate thing because it is a kill
shot it's a
contemporary uh uh expression about this
uh when he's writing on his nature on
the uh the concept of baptism um in his
work on baptism chapter 17 includes this
uh quaint little
reference um let me just read a section
of this but the women of uh woman of
pertis who has usurped the power to
teach will of course not give birth for
herself likewise to a right of baptizing
unless some new Beast shall arise like
the former so that just as the one
abolished baptism so some should uh some
others should in her own right confer it
but if the writings which wrongly go
under Paul's name claim Thea's example
as a license for women's teaching and
baptizing let them know that in Asia The
preser Who uh composed that writing as
if he were AR uh augmenting Paul's Fame
from his own door after being convicted
and confessing that he had done it from
a love of Paul was removed from his
office for how credible would it seemed
that he who uh was not permitting a
woman to even learn with over boldness
should give a female the power of
teaching and of baptizing let them be
silent he says in 1 Corinthians 14 and
at home consult their own
husbands so toolan here is writing just
he just mentions it as a byword when
he's writing about all about baptism and
so forth he's writing about baptism and
then he's going you know for those who
think that women are allowed to baptize
and use the story of uh the acts of Paul
and Thea which by the way already shows
you how popular this work had gotten um
in you know in the in the like single
decade this is this is a contemporary
ttan living at the same time writing
about this and says look this is this is
being written we know who wrote this all
right the preser who wrote that he did
it out of love for Paul and he was
convicted about that and he confessed
that he wrote it um and he was removed
from his office as punishment I mean
that's that's a contemporary historical
consistent consistent with the end of
the second century response of the
church in asiia minor that sounds good
everything about that holds no red flags
historically whatsoever and it also
gives us the Contemporary expression
of what there what some people's
opinions were about that some people
loved it and were actually using it as
an excuse to have women start baptizing
and her toan's like no that's not a
Biblical thing no that's not how this
works and you can't use that book for it
because we know who wrote it and it's
this over here that lost his lost
his role as a preser he's
out so that gives us first nail in the
coffin in the west let's do another one
late fifth century or more likely 6th
Century the decrum glaum uh the supposed
uh list of uh books or the decree of
galatius uh Pope in the late fifth
century um whether this actually came
from Pope glacius or not is is a point
of disagreement and discussion again
everything in church history is um but
this is at least late fifth century if
not 6th Century uh it's a list that is a
list of all of the books that are not
acceptable and the ones that are it's
all about about uh pretty much our whole
Library that's come down to us what do
we do with all this um and in this list
again late fth Century so like 490s or
sometime in the 6th Century the
500s in this list the acts of paulena is
not only unsuitable for teaching or use
in the church but is also specified as
among the writings that and I quote have
been compiled or been recognized by
Heretics or schismatics
and the Catholic and Apostolic Roman
church does not in any way
receive of these we have thought it
right to cite below a few which have
been handed down and which are to be
avoided by Catholics and the list that
follows that contains the acts of Paul
and Thea followed up by this statement
we acknowledge uh is to be not merely
rejected but eliminated from the whole
Roman Catholic and Apostolic church and
with their authors and the followers of
its authors to be damned in the inext
shackles of anathema forever
unquote
so uh in the negative I'll just
summarize that um they do not uh treat
this in this time period in the west as
anything good whatsoever in fact quite
dangerous now here's the pl that I'll
I'll put forward I agree thoroughly with
this uh on certain aspects I don't know
if we can say that all works of
historical fiction designed you know
which they list basically almost every
hagiography in the early church uh in
this list as as the authors and anyone
who follows that belong in the
inextricable shackles of anathema
forever
that's that's a little harsher than I
probably would write that um but the
power of popularity will overturn
papal uh directives on this uh
strangely um Thea was not ever formally
canonized as a saint it was actually her
popular devotion especially in the East
uh that gave rise to her enduring effect
and she had pockets of devotion in the
west as well um she was eventually
included in the Roman martyrology which
cemented her memory in the Roman church
now that's the Roman martyrology
Calendar um which she is placed excuse
me she was placed on September 23rd of
every year um and she was placed placed
there not in the 6th or 7th or 8th
Century or the 10th or the 11th or
12th she was placed there in the wake of
the Council of
Trent in the late 1500s 16th
century in fact her addition to the
Roman martyrology was made during The
Counter Reformation of the 16th century
in the face of protestant critiques of
cical of clerical celibacy and virginity
it was one of the effects of the the
Council of Trent that she was added in
the year
1568 before this her recognition was
largely in the East and as I said only
sparsely locally celebrated in the west
but I want to read you the the excerpt
from her placement on September 23rd in
the Roman martyrological
calendar September
23 at Leoni in lonia St Thea virgin and
Martyr who was converted to the Faith by
the Apostle St
Paul under the emperor
Nero she was Victorious over the flames
and the beasts to which she was exposed
for the Faith of Christ and after many
combats endured for the instruction of
others she went to salua where she ended
her days in peace her memory has been
eulogized by the holy fathers
now there's a lot stuff there um one the
anachronisms continue to build on one
another her story starts in the year 47
in
Iconium that is not under Emperor
Nero okay Emperor Nero is a couple
Emperors away at this point um that and
that was where she was Victorious over
the Flames that that she's like 16 17
maybe 18 years old at that point um that
is undeniably in the late 40s the story
of the beasts again you know how do you
exactly lay out something that has so
many anachronisms in its own stead as
far as for the story is concerned it
sounds like it's within the next year
and so you know when she gets thrown to
the beasts Because by the way the the
later embellishments that take place in
the East have her living for another 72
years after that you know so this is not
something that's going to wait you know
15 20 years before we come to the reign
of Nero so we know the Flames part
wasn't during the uh Emperor Nero again
the anachronisms of this and the
problems with timelines and everything
else and the fact that Paul was not in
Iconium during the reign of Nero U uh
that was in Acts 14 that was decidedly
that was before Claudius you know that
that kind of stuff really calls into
real problem here uh even the vision of
this in the 16th century was off uh um
uh let's see she was exposed for the
Faith of Christ again it wasn't for the
Faith of Christ it was other nonsensical
reasons that nobody got killed for in
those days but whole another story uh
after many combats endured for the
instruction of others she went to salua
where she ended her last days in peace
now that's that's a fascinating way to U
uh I'm going to call that historical
spackle there um she went to salua and
ended her days in peace yeah well they
say that because they don't really know
which version of the story was true um
the one that that they are referencing
Without Really explaining it is that she
went to salua and lived in a cave for 72
years as an aesthetic
hermit um and did all sorts of mirac
miraculous healings and things like this
that's the story from the East the West
here doesn't really want to go to that
extent because extreme asceticism had
worked such problems in the west as it
was but so they just leave it as she
went to salua and she ended her days in
peace her memory has been eulogized by
the holy fathers
um as as much as um as much as I would
like to say that you know it tried to
fix the historicity of that it it really
tried to add some spackle to her story
to make it more believable because again
why clarify she's under the emperor Nero
well because we know nobody was being
tied to the stake and being thrown to
Lions before a
Nero but if you actually read the acts
of Paul and Thea you find out that that
is nowhere near Nero's Reign um really
problematic uh but you know who cares as
long as it does something good right
ends justify the means uh before
this um before the Council of Trent's
reaction to all of this uh and this is
one of those decisions in the wake of
that her recognition was largely just in
the East um but she gets added to the
Roman mar mar mological calendar um for
September 23rd in the year 1568 and was
cele celebrated
through for 400
years then comes Vatican
2 you say oh no tell me there's no
changes oh yeah there is in the wake of
Vatican 2 in fact many saints were
removed from this lurgical calendar uh
due to issues with
historicity um which is a really really
fancy way of saying uh and a very
academic way of saying we don't know
whether or not any of this
happened it was in 1969 that she was
removed from the Western liturgical
calendar now some saints that were
removed alongside of her uh whose other
stories were basically nothing but
legends and myths just like hers uh were
added back because of public outcry by
the way public outcry is almost always
going to win when it comes to religion
um this one of the reasons why central
author doesn't work with religion but
that's a whole another
discussion and but as far as for Thea
she has not been added back um people
like St Christopher who are almost
equally legendary and mythological uh
were added back in the early 2000s but
she so far has not um and we're going on
what almost 60
years so that's where it sits in the
west what about the Earth what about the
East well the opinion of the East
church is very
different it is a very different story
in the East one
because her entire life takes place in
the East Iconium and Antioch whether
it's pidia or on the Aras um or salua
and all these the this is all very
Eastern and so her Fame in the
east in the uh in the mid 4th
Century maybe some part of the early 4th
Century with with the rise of the desert
fathers with the rise of aestheticism
and monasticism in response to the
Imperial imposition of the Roman emperor
Constantine there was many people in the
East that uh insisted suffering was the
way of it and we will if you know
basically if the Empire is not going to
have us suffer then we're going to go
find a way to suffer on our own um that
rise of a response to monasticism in a
ticism in the east in the 4th Century
not only saw an increased in devotion
for Thea but it also saw the expansions
of her story of living in a cave for 72
years as an aesthetic hermit because
well why
not she became of particular devotion
among female Aesthetics looking to live
a life of celibacy and spiritual
discipline again that sounds nice on the
surface but here we are talking about uh
um practices that are not taught in the
scriptures but are assumed to be
Apostolic because of the lies of
hagiography that's really problematic
because it does affect faith and
practice and our view of what is
moral her
reputation honestly grew so much that
she received the title is apostos in the
East which translated to English is
equal to the apostles
now if that title doesn't fill you with
red flags uh I'm not sure what will
except for the fact that Constantine
also has the same title equal to the
apostles um you can look into that uh is
apostos is u a very problematic title
used in the East and I do not care that
people say oh no that's just to say as
far as forther the breadth of uh just no
no no no no no no no no I I no that's a
that's not just a problematic that is a
downright insane title to use for
anybody that's not an apostle um the
apostles were Apostles for a reason uh
and they had a very specific role and
that role was done
um and and calling somebody who does not
in any way have any consistent story
with ever even existing in history and
yet shows nothing but legendary
materials on the level of something like
Matthew or Paul or Peter or James or
John
or Nathaniel or Thomas or Philip I mean
to say that she is on the level of that
in any way whatsoever is is honestly as
as a Christian offensive that the
apostles had a very unique clarified
historical theologically accurate
defined role even if we don't know the
rest of their personal stories or how
they died exactly or anything like this
putting Thea in that c or or even
Constantine which he is as well we'll
talk about that when we get to the 4th
Century um putting her in that kind of a
fashion just shows again it's kind of
like more hagiography adding on to more
that teaches us more about the Church of
the fourth and fifth century in the East
than it does about
Thea there was a church near
salua that was built to deal with the
influx of those on pilgrimage to her
cave again in the 4th Century her Legend
was expanded to include 72 years of
living in a cave in salua uh and so when
people started to do pilgrimages as part
of Christian piety even though that's
not a Christian practice in the New
Testament whatsoever but fourth Century
it became it so in the fifth century
they built a church or Basilica near
salua uh to deal with the influx of the
pilgrimage to her cave
um and as is always the case uh Miracles
and New Legends around the Basilica and
the Cav
reported and so when icons became the
law of the
East uh in the 8th Century with uh NAA 2
uh the worst Le argued supposed
ecumenical council of all history uh she
once icons became um an idolatrous part
of the church's practice uh she was
included in multiples of them uh often
depicted with the Apostle Paul or in
some of the scenes uh that were marking
her deliverances either at the stake or
in the face of wild animals either way
her fa her Fame in the East was never
pursued as actual trying to challenge it
with an actual historical reconstruction
of Thea and so her oral Traditions live
on as examples and symbols of Christian
virtues uh in the Liturgy of the Eastern
churches even
today again that tells you more about
the eastern Church's tenuous grasp on
History than it tells you about Thea
they're just fine with hagiographies
being treated as history because well
what difference does it make when the
story you're using has spiritual
value and so that leads me to our reason
for studying this today why why do this
case
study well because truth
matters truth in both areas of faith and
of
practice and the promotion of dangerous
practices like self- baptism and extreme
aestheticism are destructive as we saw
with the desert fathers and the stylight
of the fourth and fifth century perhaps
one of the most misguided sections of
the church's
history both the Imp Imperial the
promise of of peace with the Imperial um
world as well as leaving all of society
behind in the overreaction both sides
had real
problems stories like the acts of Paul
and Thea stories like Thea undermine The
credibility of the one espousing the
story and I don't know about you but
when I'm preaching the gospel when I'm
sharing with somebody about the Apostle
Paul and what he said about these things
I do not want that story to be destroyed
or affected by historical lies and
things that never happened I don't care
if they espouse virtue and piety we have
biblical stories for that we have those
in our fellowships that truly exist that
can be decent examples of piety and
faithful service I know of dozens that I
will use as examples I'm not saying we
just use the scriptures I'm saying if
you're going to use an example please oh
please use ones of people that actually
existed because if we're going to just
take historical fictions and novels
which is really what this is and turn it
into the base for practices in the 4th
Century we're going to have real
problems and it's one of the things that
has affected the east in ways that the
West has never really seen or been
affected in the same way the East was
affected by this much more deeply than
the West
because the East does not have a
self-critical bone to be able to weed
these things out I'm thankful look
listen to this Reformed Baptist
Protestant I am thankful for the
self-critical nature of Vatican 2
regarding its own history as the Roman
Catholic Church I'm even thankful for
Pope francis's recent desire to see that
church history be seen without the lens
of the Roman Catholic church and to be
able to see history for itself that's
great please we're let's let's settle
down to what Real History actually is so
that we can understand what was the
story of what came before us because
here's the thing when we found
institutional churches on historical
inaccuracies you do not make Christian
practice you make something
else you make something else where
Chastity is being argued as a higher
ideal than marriage almost almost to the
point of it's required for salvation
that's
crazy Chastity not only is not required
for salvation Chastity is not a higher
ideal than marriage celibacy no sexual
use
whatsoever nor does that teaching have
any such consistency with the scriptures
none zero
none and don't quote First Corinthians 7
at me that's that is not how this
works because 1 Corinthians 7 has to be
seen in light of the encouragements of
God's specific design said by the same
Apostle in Ephesians chapter
5 and the Very fact that the first
pastors the presetters of the church
were unanimously required to be
married and to have children read 1
Timothy chapter
3 if cannot manage a household how is he
to manage the
church these things are not consistent
with the Paul that the writer of the
acts of Paul and Thea put
forward but why else should we
care well fuzzy lines between truth and
symbolism is where tyranny and heresy
have an easy way into the
church if you come up to somebody and
they start arguing furing well the
reason that we venerate Mary for
instance is because of this this and
this and this typology about an arc
somewhere this and that symbolism is how
heresy gets
in such typologies need to be taught by
the apostles if they're going to affect
faith and
practice especially with something that
flirts with idolatry as much as that
does I want to give I want to close with
a warning from one of the Apostles on
this and that is 2 Peter 1:1 16 about
the apostles respect for true history
when they told the story of
Christ second Peter and I'll just finish
with this 2 Peter
1:16 we did not follow cleverly devised
myths when we made known to you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ we were
eyewitnesses of his majesty
that is so much better than historical
fictions as the ground of the
church may the Lord bless you all
[Music]
oh
[Applause]
[Music]